Berlin is home to many Israelis and
Palestinians some of them have taken
part in protest marches and rallies
others are calling for peaceful
coexistence these include the owners of
a restaurant here in the German Capital
an Israeli and a Palestinian who share a
passion for food and
friendship the Canan restaurant in
Berlin strives to set an example of
togetherness and peace this is our our
belief this is our message this is our
wish to create more and more spaces that
people can realize how
much we are similar how much we are
shared with each other and that will be
the ground to start communicate in
different way bonded by a shared love of
humus co-owners osben David and Jal
davit opened on together 8 years ago
they offer meat-free dishes from their
individual cultures along with a shared
goal understanding between Israelis and
Palestinians our philosophy in Kus and
in food sorry like people that you have
to mix stuff
together to get the really amazing stuff
like everything by himself is very nice
but the real magic happen is when you
have a bite of a bit of
everything but then came the Hamas
terrorist attack against Israel like you
know someone that is in pain and kicking
his friend and his friend is hugging him
that's what J did he was just standing
there and he told
me I get you I feel you you want to
close for a few days let's close for a
few days Jalil went back home to help
out in his family's restaurant but he
was always there to provide
comfort
was really disappointed was really like
like really crushed and me too like I
was crying like like a baby for a few
days but I talked to all about this when
Israel started bombing Gaza many marched
in Berlin huge protests were tainted by
anti-semitic racist and islamophobic
sentiment Canan is now back open with a
stronger flavor of defiance something in
me
felt like okay so this is how they win
this is how the bad people win we start
to get scared we shutting down ourself
the good places the places where people
can sit together and just handing them a
winning reward exactly the opposite of
what I want canan's famous hus and
culture of understanding are now on the
the menu again along with the hope for
peace now German president Frank valter
steinm has expressed deep concern over
the security of Jewish life here in
Germany he brought together
representatives of Jewish and
Palestinian organizations Palestinian
Israeli entrepreneurs as well as the
Holocaust Survivor am Margo of
friedlander he condemned anti-jewish
sentiment that has been on the rise
since October 7th and said the
protection of Jewish life was not just a
reason of state but an obligation of
everyone living in
Germany anyone who lives in this country
or wants to live he must respect the
rules of peaceful
coexistence they must be aware of our
history I recently said it at the
brandenbur gate and I will repeat it
today those living in Germany must know
of aitz concentration camp and
extermination camp camp and the
responsibility that arises from it
protecting Jewish life in Germany is a
state Duty and a Civic
obligation this applies to everyone
living in our country I'm convinced that
we need to make that clearer than
before me lip service will not be enough
in this time of Terror and
hatred our political correspondent Julia
Deli listened to the address and joins
us now from outside the presidential
Palace welcome Julia um so talk us to
the message that the president
had yeah he uh started speaking with
addressing uh the terrorist attack that
Hamas conducted against Israel saying
that this was a turning point uh for
Israel itself but also for the region
and the world and that there is no going
back uh from this event and then he
moved on to address some of the tensions
that have been building up in Germany
since uh the conflict between Israel and
Hamas uh in the Middle East and he
addressed the fact that on the one side
there has been a strong increase in
anti-semitic cases in Germany there have
been attacks against synagogues there
have been expressions of hate against
Jews and this is something that he said
Germany will never condone in any case
whether the anti-Semitism is coming from
the far right or whether it is coming
from islamist uh corners and other parts
of
society and now president Stein Meer is
hosting a round table with Jewish and
Palestinian Representatives um what can
we expect from those
discussions well these are all people
who come uh from the Jewish or Israeli
community and from the Muslim and Arab
communities and they are already
involved in working in building a bridge
between these communities and finding
ways for a peaceful coexistence for
living peacefully together for example
we have uh two people an Israeli and a
Palestinian who run a restaurant
together here in Berlin or people who
are involved for example a rabbi and an
Imam who are involved in Social projects
uh together and we expect the discussion
to focus exactly on this how can these
communities come together to overcome
the tensions and uh be able to live
peacefully in Germany thanks for that
Julia our DW political correspondent
Julia
selli our middle EAS analyst shanie
rosanes is still with us so welcome back
shaie so President we heard president
steinm say that he's concerned with
violence uh in the Middle East which
could threaten uh social peace here in
Germany so that's a real danger oh yes
definitely uh We've you know that this
conflict is brings so much emotion so
many people that are feeling that they
have a stake in this is in this conflict
because they're immigrants they're all
coming from backgrounds that are
connected somehow um to Palestine to the
Arab world same goes with Israelis and
Jews living in Germany and we've seen
detention we we've felt it on the
streets I think anybody could feel that
you you talk about you see testimonies
around Europe in the US this is spilling
far beyond the specific region but I
want to also hang on to one thing he
said that he realizes um each side you
know among the the people sitting in the
table there are people sharing the
suffering of the other side and we tend
to forget that you know we live in a
world that is so polarized social media
is you know it's always so quick and so
onesided uh but the truth is very
complex and a lot of time exists in the
middle between the people who are
grieving and suffering for the loved
ones either Jews or or Palestinians
living in Israel but then at the same
time see the other side and and what
he's trying to accommodate here is is
the the very existence
of the suffering of acknowledging the
other one's suffering as the key of you
know keeping you know in line with
humanity and therefore um keeping this
discussion you know within the
legitimate borders of it and not Beyond
and um picking out uh uh Jewish and
Palestinian um communities uh and
addressing them directly what was the
president's message well I think first
of all we want to say you are being
heard to both sides you are being seen
uh but we also need to focus on the
opportunities not just the pain not just
the anger not just the grief but on the
opportunities many of the people he
introduced are are are couples that are
working in in in coordination for a long
time in order to facilitate Interfaith
coexistent projects educational projects
um you know communal projects that that
try to show it is happening it can
happen if we if we stay away from you
know the rhetorics that is so toxic and
and that is so polarizing let's hang on
to to the hope because the tragic thing
is that many of the people who find
themselves far from the conflict choose
to be there because they want different
lives they want Alternatives they want
to choose better um and when they're
drawn back into the very flat discussion
very populist discussion of either this
or that um you know these are the
tensions that we see Rising you know and
everybody lose in the end and the German
uh government and state authorities in
in a difficult uh position as tensions
increase and and we already see armed
police outside Jewish institutions and
despite that Jewish communities uh still
saying they feel threatened yes because
you know the you the fear it's not NE
necessarily IR rational you know that
there's the feeling is something has
changed and that is something that Shin
also acknowledges that something in SE
October 7th have changed in the whole
perception of Israel I mean the way
Israel has seen itself for so many years
is that the deterrence effect is such
that it it serves as its biggest asset
when it comes to defense but Jews around
the world also have felt that isra
strong Israel is some sort of a of a of
a of a policy insurance policy for them
knowing that there's always a place for
them to to escape but knowing there's a
there's a a sort of a a Lobby a strong a
strong you know player on the
international Arena that can support the
causes for the Jews um around the world
and what we've seen in last month is
that the all these assumptions seem to
have crumbled and you know now there a a
game to redefine um what is it that
still makes um you
know that keeps this the the strength
and and and force of Israel and of the
Jews around the world who have seen it
as its Beacon of of protection and so
how does I mean how is the German
government doing then in walking this
line they walking this line uh between
uh honoring its historic um uh
responsibility uh for what happened uh
to Jews uh in the past with its very
modern responsibility to ensure uh free
speech and debate well it's one one of
that is what we've seeing now I mean
those Public Announcement but but steinm
is also very much afraid of just lip
surfice and he says that we cannot just
stick to you know nice statements that
want to think that everything is fine I
see how we are threatened how are very
fundamental social existence here as a
as a country that brings together
immigrants from all over the world can
be threatened by this um I think clearly
from the people that that the president
has chosen to bring on education is the
key um meeting is the key getting to
people people to see you know each other
as people you not not losing the
humanity uh but then at the same time
we've also seen actions such as on the
one hand uh very clearly standing
against Hamas we've seen the interior
Minister also taking a stand on that
officially banning all connections to
Hamas from from Germany but then still
more and more allowing for Palestinians
uh uh to demonstrate to talk to to to
face their their you know to bring out
to public their fears their their
concerns um and then at the same time a
lot of pressure that is put on Israel by
the International Community to allow for
more um ceasefires and humanitarian Aid
to be coming into Gaza to sort of show
we are advocating for the people of Gaza
while trying to still um accept Israel's
right to defend itself thanks for much
for that sh shie rosanes is at DW's
Middle East
analyst